Our project, “Architect in Control (Archive in Control),” simultaneously confronts the authority of the architect and of the archive through three case studies, each with its own epilogue. We came to the CCA without a research proposal. What we did know is that we would be encountering the archives of D’Astous, Desbarats, and Prus, of whom we admittedly knew very little. Therefore, we were always wary of our approach, our way in. There are nearly four hundred projects in this body of work: how were we going to select which objects to consult, let alone to build a project around?

Soon we realized that moving through the archive is a subjective process and that inevitably the story of three architects would also be the story of three researchers. Considering this kind of “blind date” we had been set up on, we decided on a couple of early parameters. Firstly, we had neither the time nor the experience to present a complete portrait of these architects and their work—this would not be a comprehensive survey. Instead, we would let our own subjectivity guide the research.

Secondly, as design students we would allow ourselves to be more interventionist. When we learned that our own work at the CCA would be archived, our process was thought of as beginning and ending with the archive—a kind of cycle. In other words, “digging into the archive” would be complimented by adding to it. Making this addition would give us the opportunity to respond to the material of the archive and in a way begin to question its authority. Thus, in the form of epilogues to three case studies we will also be presenting three new objects.

However, confronting the archive was not our only intention. By studying three different cases we wish to illuminate a period in architectural history that was significant to the city of Montreal (and to the country as a whole). To focus our work we chose a theme that at both responds to the period we are studying—the mid-sixties—and addresses the nature of our research. The theme of control examines the conditions of the working architect during this period that, incidentally, mirror the conditions we faced as researchers—mainly, the freedom to experiment.

All three architects made significant built contributions to Montreal during the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s, including their participation in Expo ’67. As described in the 2004 CCA exhibition and publication The 60s: Montreal Thinks Big, this was a period of optimistic, international outlook, resulting in an architectural playing field of exceptional opportunity. In contrast, the book Anxious Modernisms of 2000, co-published by the CCA, identifies in the post-WWII period of Western architecture a shared sense of anxiety. How, then, do we relate the ideas of freedom and anxiety? In the case of D’Astous, Desbarats and Prus, this summer’s project asks: did newfound freedom cause newfound anxiety?

In its simplest form architecture might just be is a series of lines and boxes that come together to create a sculptural object. However, the sole of a space is directly connected to characters of its inhabitants and the natural environment that surrounds it.

The Shopify Office in Montreal is almost finished and the staff has moved in. The above photos are  just a few quick snaps of what the spaces look like but the project is not yet complete. Please stay tuned for more (and better) photos soon.

Montreal is a topography in great transition. From mountainous apexes to underwater terrains, each transitional line signifies building, culture and lifestyles that thread one to the other. Over time, these threads become the apexes of the city and the lines gradually respond to their needs in return. Through this cyclical environment of cause and effect, the city roots itself in a topography of layering, establishing the grounds for future growth and development. Once-new textures become old and are eventually reclaimed into the new again. Buildings become responsive yet progressive and the existing landscape is celebrated through its adaptation.

The topography of the new Shopify Montreal Office is the result of an adapted site and a complex program. Within each of these programmatic elements, exist a series of influences such as light, sound, and the need for a range of private and public settings. Together, these along with many others, determine the location of nodes to which the more secondary architectural moves yield and support.

Through this process, gradients emerge in both program and materiality. Materials and textures will be used to reveal and conceal, while forms become steps that flow into seating, evolving into collaborative lookouts from which one can view the landscape below. Beneath these summits are niches, carved out during the extrusion of the lookouts above, while relics from the existing will be adapted for inhabitation in new ways. Shopify Montreal will refrain from becoming an echo of the past, but instead a ripple from the collision of a grounded knowledge with a fresh terrain.

Architectural Moves

The topography of Shopify Montreal will be a microcosm of the terrain that surrounds it. the space will root itself in a series of spatial rhythms, offset by unexpected apexes that emphasize relationships between the ground and sky. Climbing will be a frequent theme, inviting users to discover spaces to tuck away or be on display. It is through the movement from one to the other that users will experience the true topography of their spaces, seamlessly transitioning from private to public, ground to apex. Views of the surrounding Montreal landscape will be optimized to reconnect users to the outside environment. These views will be framed by casual and open spaces where individials can reflect introspectively or discuss ideas in a group setting; taking advantage of naturals light and the active environment beyond the glass.

Where visual connections to the natural environment cannot be easily made, greenery will be introduced to enhance the terrain of the interior, emphasizing both vertical connections as well as grounding ones.

Common spaces are designed to invite creative adaptation, allowing users to host meetings, hear lectures or work independently all in the same space. As designers, we design for the the scenarios we anticipate, but provide the opportunity for those which have yet to be fathomed. Through the exploration of these, in addition to a plethora of other layers, the topography of Shopify Montreal is the result of many moments that work together to form a landscape for interaction.

Ottawa’s Shopify is a world leader in providing a full range of user-friendly Ecommerce services. With success, significant expansion of its head office was required to accommodate over 800 employees. The mandate was to apply the best evidence-based principles of high functioning office design to ensure an innovative collaborative workplace focused not just on productivity but also employee health and well-being. To remain in the city’s downtown core, the challenge became to convert eight storeys of a new but standard office tower into a creative innovation hub.

Successful collaborations depend on accidental “collisions,” casual, unplanned interactions and conversations. Maximizing movement through a myriad of linked communal spaces, therefore, plays an important role in Shopify’s design. Its organization begins with a grand, open stair rising continuously through all eight floors. Integrated seating along the side of the stairs increases socializing leading to creative collaborations. Additionally, a large two-storey cafeteria/café space, connected by two grand spiral staircases wrapped in raw steel ribbons, doubles as a flexible performance and social gathering venue. Not least, a gourmet kitchen ensures healthy food choices for staff.

Evidence demonstrates productive offices require a balance of spaces facilitating both collaborative interaction and focused individual work. Shopify’s office, therefore, contains a carefully structured ensemble of varied spaces providing workers what they need and want at different times for different tasks. Each has an assigned “home” workstation; but within a non-hierarchical office landscape, choice and control over where work is done resides with each employee. In addition to clusters of open, un-partitioned workstations – always along windows for natural light and views – there are multiple enclosed boardrooms for both collaborative and focused work, an array of semi-private nooks and alleys tucked into “found space” along exterior windows as well as armchair salons for informal meetings, conversations, reading or just working on a laptop. There are even climb-in, upholstered pods, sort of “creativity wombs.”

Enclosed collaborative rooms eschew fish bowl transparency opting for visual privacy but with light from strategically placed ribbon windows. Various acoustic strategies from calibrated glass for interior windows to large fabric covered light fixtures to absorb sound and reduce echoing are used to mitigate noise.

Each floor has its own theme such as European, Canadiana, Toronto Back Alley, and cool Modernism. These themes, however, are subtly expressed with authenticity achieved through real materials, no veneers, custom work by local talent and an avoidance of the fake. Works of art saturate communal spaces including one floor with graffiti art commissioned from Montreal street artists. Colours are bold and fresh, natural and muted or subtle and sophisticated depending on the theme and functioning of the space. Even smell is considered, provided by a large cedar clad lounge in which the aroma of the unfinished wood encourages relaxation. The result ensures texture, rich materiality and visual stimulation.

The design of Shopify’s office responds to an emerging idea that moves beyond work/life balance to work/life integration where the work environment can be as comfortable as home. Spaces where Shopify’s creative employees are happy to linger.

The former St.Charles church sits on a large lot in a predominantly French-Canadian neighbourhood. The church had a long history as a gathering place for the communities that surround it. As a sign of the times, the church closed it doors in 2011 after 100 years. It was deconsecrated in 2013.

This is a development project with the aim to reimagine the purpose of the church building and add density to its surrounding property. A significant challenge and a great opportunity for us in the design is the Heritage status of the building. Its three exterior walls and iconic bell tower are protected and cannot be altered. Working with such constraints often incites the need to be much more creative. As a result, we proposed that the main church building be repurposed as a year-round, indoor food market. There will also be some bistros, a coffee shop and restaurants. As with other great markets from around the world, the St.Charles Market will act as a hub for area residents but hopefully also attract people from around the city.

Surrounding the church, there will be a series of “horizontal homes”, a combination of townhouse and condos above. The design took take some stylistic cues from the church, like the pitch of the roof and the colours from the stained glass. We wanted to creates spaces that would be just as comfortable and spacious as single family dwellings.

In the preliminary design sessions we also looked to Mies van der Rohe for inspiration. In particular we paid close attention to his use of seemingly simple lines and forms, dark steel and coloured glass. We also felt that a modern and minimalistic design juxtaposed with the century church building would make for an unexpected and beautiful overall aesthetic.

The overall master plan for the site also maintains a significant amount of outdoor public space that includes: an outdoor sculpture garden, patios, seating and space for a seasonal al fresco farmer’s market.
With its blackened skin and stealthy profile, the new museum cuts a seductive and sombre figure on the historic dock that pitches it in sharp contrast to its neighbours. Like a nebulous, ghostly void it lurks with amorphic ambiguity beside the riotous Gulliverian fantasia of old Victory next door.

The project develops the realms of the in-between, the inter-est, the realm of democratic openness, plurality and potential. By navigating the course between rigid totalities on the one hand, and the chaos of events on the other, this building reflects an evolving identity open to profound public participation, access and education. The building is therefore a catalyst for focusing energies - both entrepreneurial and spiritual - and moulding them into a creative expression.

Like the mixture of two incompatible substances - oil and vinegar - the urban pavement and the parks turf flow together in a mutual embrace forming terraced pockets overlooking the park and elevating islands of nature above the city. A series of seemingly singular pavilions that weave together to form a unified institution - like individual fingers united together in a mutual grip.

The park’s architecture refuses to operate as the expression of a preexisting content, whether subjective, formal or functional. Just as it does not answer to the demands of the self (the sovereign or “creative” architect), so it negates the imminent dialectic of the form, since the latter is displaced by superimpositions and transformations of elements that always exceed any given formal configuration. In a Nietzschean manner, La Villette moves towards interpretative infinity, for the effect of refusing fixity is not insignificance but semantic plurality.

Everything is designed to evoke an emotional response to the primary object, to protect it from light, but also to capture that rare ray of light indispensable to make it vibrate and awaken its spirituality … Away, then, with the structures, mechanical systems, with curtain walls, with emergency staircases, parapets, false ceilings, projectors, pedestals, showcases. If their functions must be retained, they must disappear from our view and our consciousness, vanish before the sacred objects so we may enter into communion with them.
Our project represents an attempt to rethink the symbolism of the vertical office building. Traditionally, the vertical building had two metaphoric connotations, one as a metaphor for anthropocentrism (the human vertebrae as upright, symmetrical and skeletal) and the other as a symbol of power and dominance, in particular, phallocentrism. Our building symbolically seeks to undermine these two centrisms, first by producing a building that is not metaphorically skeletal or striated … and second, by producing an image somewhere between an erect and a ‘limp’ condition.
Our proposal offers a quasi-urban field, a ‘world’ to dive into rather than a building as signature object. The campus is organised and navigated on the basis of directional drifts and distribution of densities rather than key points. This is indicative of the character of the MAXXI as a whole: porous, immersive, a field space. An inferred mass is subverted by vectors of circulation. The external as well as internal circulation follows the overall drift of the geometry. Vertical and oblique circulation elements are located at areas of confluence, interference and turbulence.
